Proposal for Problem Statement 3, Hackenza 20261
Reliable Underwater Communication Using Smartphones.
Aadi Bhattacharya1, B. Varun Kumar2, Mudit Kejriwal3, Rhythm Lalwani4
1 2025B7PS1150G, aadiforacads@gmail.com
2 2025AJPS1184G, acads.varun@gmail.com
3 2025A7PS0867G, mudit.kejriwal12345@gmail.com
4 2025A3PS0746G, rhythmlalwani2007@gmail.com
Team POSIX Helpline.
[Prepared for Prof. Arnab Paul.]
Keywords:Keywords:Rolling Shutter Effect, Mie Scattering, Rayleigh Scattering, Convolutional Cod-
ing, Block Interleaving, 4B5B Run-Length Limited Coding, Pulse Position Modulation, Viterbi Decod-
ing, Adaptive Thresholding, Soft-Decision Decoding.
Abstract.Radio-frequency communication fails underwater within centimetres due to severe
signal attenuation, while acoustic systems require dedicated transducer hardware absent from
consumer devices. Recent work by Chi et al. demonstrates that smartphone flashlights and cam-
eras can close this gap by exploiting the rolling shutter effect of CMOS sensors: ON/OFF light
pulses are captured as alternating bright and dark horizontal stripe patterns in video frames,
achieving optical data transfer at ranges of 2.4-9.8 m. A counterintuitive property of the under-
water channel makes this practical - water scattering enlarges the camera’s Region of Interest
(RoI) and improves detectability rather than degrading it.
We propose U-Flash: a software-only native Android application that enables optical com-
munication between two unmodified smartphones using only the built-in rear flashlight and
camera. A four-stage encoding pipeline addresses the channel’s failure modes in order of im-
pact: a rate-1/2, constraint-length-4 convolutional code provides error correction; depth-20
block interleaving converts burst errors from scattering events into isolated single-bit errors the
Viterbi decoder handles well; 4B5B run-length limited coding prevents wide uniform stripes
that destabilise the adaptive threshold; and 4-position pulse position modulation (4-PPM) makes
symbol detection independent of absolute brightness, eliminating the dominant cause of thresh-
old drift. On the receiver side, the Camera2 API is configured in fully manual mode with
fixed exposure to prevent auto-exposure from corrupting luminance estimates; a sliding-window
adaptive threshold computes a per-row decision level from local statistics; and a soft-decision
Viterbi decoder with a burst-aware branch metric exploits the correlated structure of underwater
errors. The design is scoped explicitly for a 24-hour implementation window: every component
choice prioritises debuggability and correctness over theoretical optimality or maximum data
rate. The strongerK= 7codec is validated in Python simulation and included in the technical
report; the mobile demo runsK= 4. Target: BER<10 −2 at 1 m with ambient light variation;
correct intelligible voice decode over a complete round-trip; no external hardware.
1 Introduction
Underwater wireless communication is a persistent engineering problem. Radio-frequency
signals attenuate at roughly 0.18 dB/cm at 2.4 GHz, making Wi-Fi and LTE useless beyond a
few centimetres [1]. Acoustic communication works over much longer distances but requires
Article version: 21st February 2026
Proposal for Problem Statement 3, Hackenza 20262
dedicated transducer hardware that no consumer device carries. Divers still communicate by
hand signal.
Chi et al. [2] showed that an unmodified smartphone suffices for optical communication over
2.4-7.6 m in daylight and up to 9.8 m at night, using only the rear LED and camera. Their key
finding is counterintuitive: water scattering, which intuition says should degrade the optical
signal, is actually beneficial. Mie scattering from suspended particles concentrates forward-
scattered light toward the receiver, effectively acting as a gain stage. Rayleigh scattering from
smaller particles broadens the illuminated area at the sensor, enlarging the Region of Interest
(RoI) and relaxing alignment requirements. Water absorption suppresses off-axis ambient light
and improves contrast. The scattering effects are exploited throughout this design rather than
suppressed.
Our proposal takes the physical model of Chi et al. as its foundation and focuses on the
reliability and implementability gap: how to build a system that demonstrably works under
real device motion and ambient light variation, within a 24-hour development window with no
external hardware. Every design choice in this document is evaluated against two criteria: does
it address a real failure mode, and can a four-person team implement and debug it under time
pressure.
2 Problem Statement
Four failure modes jointly govern system reliability. Each is addressed by a distinct layer of
the proposed codec; the correspondence is made explicit in Section 5.
• Burst errors from scattering.A scattering event can extinguish a photon pulse entirely,
corrupting a contiguous run of bits rather than a single isolated bit. Standard convolutional
codes designed for independent bit errors are overwhelmed when the burst length exceeds
the code’s error-correcting capability. The underwater channel is not an AWGN channel;
the codec must be designed accordingly.
• Stripe uniformity failure.Long identical-bit runs produce wide uniform stripes in the
captured frame. A single ambient light flicker across a 20-row uniform stripe inverts all 20
bit decisions simultaneously - a burst error generated by the modulation structure itself,
before any channel impairment has occurred.
• Amplitude threshold drift.Simple ON/OFF Keying (OOK) requires the decoder to
know the correct brightness boundary between a transmitted 1 and a transmitted 0. This
boundary drifts continuously with distance, water clarity, and ambient light. A threshold
calibrated at message start can be completely wrong by message end.
• RoI drift and illumination change.Device motion shifts the RoI position and shape
between frames. Changing ambient light shifts absolute luminance levels. A fixed RoI
boundary or fixed threshold fails under either condition.
The hardware constraint is absolute: only the rear flashlight, camera, IMU, and ambient light
sensor may be used. No external optics, lenses, or hardware of any kind.
3 Technical Background
3.1The Rolling Shutter Effect and Data Rate
CMOS sensors expose pixel rows sequentially rather than simultaneously. Each row is read at
a time offset τr after the previous one; at 30 fps with 720 active rows,τr ≈46µ s. A flashlight
toggling at 180 Hz (one ON/OFF cycle every 5.56 ms) produces approximately 6 complete toggle
Proposal for Problem Statement 3, Hackenza 20263
cycles per frame: 6 bright/dark stripe pairs, each encoding one raw bit. The effective user data
rate after all encoding overheads is:
Stage Rate Reasoning
Raw stripes 180 bps 6 stripes/frame×30 fps
After 4-PPM 90 bps 2 data bits per 4-slot symbol
After 4B5B RLL 72 bps 5 bits transmitted per 4 data bits
After rate- 1
2 conv. code≈36 bps 2 output bits per input bit
Effective user data rate ≈36 bps Sufficient for 5-10 word messages
Table 1:Data rate budget at 30 fps, 180 Hz.A 10-word message ( ≈60 characters, 480 user bits) transmits in
≈13 s, which is acceptable for diver communication. Higher-fps devices (60/120/240 fps) multiply the effective rate
proportionally with no codec changes. The design deliberately prioritises robustness over throughput.
3.2Underwater Light Propagation
Optical intensity follows Beer-Lambert decay:
I(z) =I 0 e−cz,(1)
where c is the total attenuation coefficient (c≈0.15 m−1 for a clear laboratory pool, 0.3-0.6 m−1
for a recreational pool). Two scattering regimes modify the received energy budget:
• Mie scatteringfrom particles comparable in size to the light wavelength is strongly
forward-directed (asymmetry parameter g≈0.92 for pool water). It concentrates the
transmitted beam, increasing the fraction of photons captured within the camera aperture
relative to geometrically ballistic propagation. This acts as a passive gain stage.
• Rayleigh scatteringfrom smaller particles is approximately isotropic. It enlarges the
illuminated area at the sensor, expanding the RoI and making signal detection more
forgiving of angular misalignment. As the RoI grows, more image rows carry the signal,
providing within-stripe SNR improvement through row-mean averaging.
Both effects are exploited rather than filtered. The system is designed around the scattering
properties of the channel, not against them.
Chromatic dispersion arises because water’s refractive index varies with wavelength. At 20◦C,
n(450 nm)≈1.3393 and n(650 nm)≈1.3312 . The resulting group delay differential is small
in absolute terms but represents a meaningful fraction of a symbol slot at higher symbol rates,
motivating per-channel soft-value weighting at the decoder.
3.3Why Each Encoding Layer Is Distinct
The four encoding layers are not redundant. The convolutional code efficiently corrects
isolated bit errors but is overwhelmed by a burst of 20 consecutive errors. Block interleaving
converts that 20-bit burst into 20 isolated single-bit errors across 20 separate codewords, each
of which the Viterbi decoder then corrects individually. RLL coding prevents the wide uniform
stripes that produce burst errors at the demodulator before any channel impairment. PPM
removes amplitude threshold dependence entirely, which no amount of adaptive thresholding
can fully solve because the threshold algorithm itself requires a valid signal to estimate from.
Each layer’s contribution is measured independently in the ablation study (Section 7).
Proposal for Problem Statement 3, Hackenza 20264
4 Proposed System Design
The system is a native Android application in Kotlin using Camera2 for frame capture and
CameraManager for torch control. Native Android is chosen over Flutter or React Native
because the torch must toggle at 180 Hz (half-period: 2.77 ms). Cross-platform bridges introduce
2-10 ms of variable jitter per API call - nearly one full bit period of uncertainty - making reliable
timing impossible. Native Kotlin on a dedicated HandlerThread at maximum priority with a
busy-wait timing loop achieves sub-millisecond jitter.
4.1Encoding Pipeline
4.1.1Stage 1: Convolutional Coding with Block Interleaving
Convolutional code.A rate- 1/2, constraint-length-4 ( K= 4 ) code is used. Generator
polynomials G1 = [1,0,1,1] , G2 = [1,1,0,1] (octal 13, 15) give an 8-state trellis with free
distance df = 6, sufficient to correct up to 3 isolated bit errors per codeword. This is a deliberate
choice over the theoretically stronger K= 7 (64-state trellis, df = 10): the 8-state trellis is small
enough to be drawn on paper, verified by hand, and unit-tested exhaustively in under an hour. A
subtle shift-register ordering error in a K= 7 decoder produces BER that is indistinguishable
from a bad channel; the same error in aK= 4decoder fails the unit test immediately.
Technical report note: K= 7 (NASA polynomials G1 =0133 8, G2 =0171 8, df = 10 )
is the theoretically optimal target for this channel and is validated in Python simulation for
the write-up. The mobile demo uses K= 4 ; upgrading to K= 7 requires only changing the
polynomial constants and traceback length with no architectural changes.
Block interleaving (depth 20).This is the most important single reliability addition in the
system, and it costs approximately 15 lines of code. The convolutional encoder’s output is
written into a matrix row by row and transmitted column by column. At the receiver, the inverse
operation is applied before Viterbi decoding. A burst of B consecutive channel errors maps
to one error in each of B different matrix columns after de-interleaving, spreading across B
separate codewords. With depth 20, any burst of up to 20 consecutive errors - the typical range
for scattering events in pool water - is completely dispersed into 20 isolated single-bit errors,
each independently correctable by the Viterbi decoder. Without the interleaver, a 15-bit scattering
burst exceeds the K= 4 code’s correcting capability and decoding fails; with it, the same burst
is trivially handled.
4.1.2Stage 2: 4B5B Run-Length Limited Coding
The 4B5B code maps every 4-bit input nibble to a 5-bit codeword from a fixed standardised
lookup table (used identically in 100BASE-TX Ethernet and USB), ensuring no codeword
contains more than 3 consecutive identical bits. Both the encoding and decoding tables are 16
entries each and require no design work.
Without RLL coding, UTF-8 text routinely produces long runs of zeros (null bytes, space
characters, common ASCII). These produce wide dark stripes. The camera auto-exposure
responds by increasing ISO, permanently shifting the brightness baseline and corrupting the
adaptive threshold - a failure that no threshold adaptation can recover from because the estimation
algorithm relies on valid signal statistics. With 4B5B guaranteeing kR = 3, no stripe exceeds
3 rows, keeping transitions frequent enough for reliable threshold estimation. The 25% rate
overhead is included in Table 1.
4.1.3Stage 3: 4-PPM Modulation
4-position Pulse Position Modulation divides each symbol period into 4 equal time slots. The
transmitter places an ON pulse in exactly one slot; the other three are OFF. Each symbol encodes
Proposal for Problem Statement 3, Hackenza 20265
2 bits as the index of the active slot:
Data bits Active slot Flash pattern
00 0 ON, OFF, OFF, OFF
01 1 OFF, ON, OFF, OFF
10 2 OFF, OFF, ON, OFF
11 3 OFF, OFF, OFF, ON
Table 2:4-PPM symbol table.The decoder identifies the slot with the highest energy - a relative comparison
requiring no knowledge of absolute brightness. This makes symbol detection completely independent of amplitude
threshold drift.
This is the most important individual reliability improvement in the system. OOK permanently
couples symbol detection to an amplitude threshold that drifts with distance, turbidity, and
ambient light. No adaptive threshold can track this perfectly across a 13-second message. PPM
removes the coupling entirely: even if brightness changes by a factor of three during transmission,
the correct slot still has the highest energy relative to the other three.
Using soft values rather than hard binary decisions at the PPM decoder is additionally critical
when scattering blurs a pulse across two adjacent slots. The hard decoder picks one arbitrarily
(50% error rate on that symbol); the soft decoder recognises the ambiguity, assigns low confidence
to both slots, and passes the uncertainty to the Viterbi decoder, which uses code context from
adjacent symbols to resolve it.
4.1.4Stage 4: Preamble and Frame Structure
Each frame is structured as:
[32-symbol alternating preamble] [0xDEADBEEF sync word]
[payload] [CRC-16]
The alternating preamble (10101010...) serves three functions before the payload begins: the
receiver locates the stripe pattern in the frame; estimates the actual row period τr empirically by
measuring stripe widths (correcting for hardware variation between phone models); and calibrates
the initial adaptive threshold from the known ON/OFF values of the alternating sequence. The
32-bit sync word enables frame boundary detection via cross-correlation with a tolerance of
4 errors (88% match threshold); this tolerance is essential because the preamble itself may be
damaged by the burst errors that motivated the codec design.
4.2Decoding Pipeline
4.2.1Camera Configuration: Fixed Exposure is Non-Negotiable
Android’s auto-exposure algorithm adjusts sensor gain and shutter time continuously. A
single AE step midway through a message shifts all luminance values and corrupts dozens of
consecutive bits - a burst error generated entirely by the receiver’s own software, indistinguishable
at the codec level from a channel impairment. This is the most common silent failure in naive
implementations. The Camera2 capture session must be configured as follows before any signal
processing begins.
Exposure time of 2 ms is shorter than one flash half-period (2.77 ms), ensuring each sensor
row captures a definite ON or OFF state. ISO 800 provides sufficient sensitivity at underwater
light levels without saturation. Verify thatSENSOR EXPOSURE TIME is constant across frames
inCaptureResult: some manufacturer HALs partially overrideCONTROL AE MODE OFF.
If it varies, add per-frame luminance normalisation (divide each frame’s row means by its global
mean) before thresholding.
Proposal for Problem Statement 3, Hackenza 20266
4.2.2Stage 1: RoI Detection
The Y-plane of eachYUV 420 888frame is extracted and the mean luminance of each row
is computed across all columns. The RoI is located using global frame statistics:
1. Compute the global mean µ and standard deviation σ of all row-mean values in the frame.
2. Mark rowias a candidate RoI row if its mean exceedsµ+ 1.5σ.
3. Find the largest contiguous band of candidate rows; return it as the active RoI.
4. If fewer than 15 rows are marked, flag the frame as invalid and skip it.
Track RoI boundaries with an exponential moving average (coefficient 0.3) to absorb device
motion without accumulating drift. Scattering is an asset here: the enlarged illuminated area
from Rayleigh scattering means more rows exceed the threshold in pool conditions, making RoI
detection easier in water than in air.
4.2.3Stage 2: Adaptive Threshold Demodulation
Within the detected RoI, a per-row decision threshold is computed from a sliding window of
30 surrounding rows:
τi =µ w,i +ω σ w,i, ω= 0.5,(2)
where µw,i and σw,i are the mean and standard deviation of row-mean luminance in the window
[i−15, i+15] . Row i decodes to bit 1 if its luminance exceedsτi. Simultaneously, a floating-point
soft confidence value is produced for the Viterbi decoder:
λi = clip
 lumi −τ i
2σ w,i
+ 0.5,0,1

,(3)
where λi >0.5 indicates confidence toward bit 1. This recovers approximately 2 dB of additional
coding gain at no implementation cost beyond storing a float.
4.2.4Stage 3: Preamble Sync and PPM Demodulation
The receiver slides the known sync word across the decoded hard-bit sequence and takes the
position with the highest match fraction above 88% as the frame boundary. Frames with no
position above 88% are discarded; frames that pass the CRC-16 check are decoded.
For each 4-PPM symbol slot, the soft value λ of each of the 4 sub-intervals is compared; the
sub-interval with the highest value is the decoded symbol, and its 2-bit index is the output.
4.2.5Stages 4-6: 4B5B Decode, De-Interleave, Viterbi
The standard 4B5B reverse lookup table decodes each 5-bit word. The depth-20 block de-
interleaver reverses the column-major read order, converting dispersed channel errors back into a
sequence for the Viterbi decoder. The soft-decision Viterbi decoder operates on the 8-state trellis
with branch metric:
M(b) =λ·w burst(b),(4)
where λ is the soft confidence from (3) and wburst(b) accounts for the correlated burst structure
of the underwater channel: wburst = 0.6 for a burst-consistent mismatch (two consecutive
mismatches) and 1.0 for an isolated mismatch. This reflects the prior that in the underwater
channel, consecutive errors are more probable than isolated errors - isolated-error paths are
penalised more heavily than burst-error paths. Traceback length is5(K−1) = 15bits.
Proposal for Problem Statement 3, Hackenza 20267
4.3Torch Timing: Busy-Wait is Required
Thread.sleep() has 1-2 ms of variable jitter on Android. At 180 Hz (half-period 2.77 ms),
a 2 ms jitter event corrupts timing by 72% of one bit period. A scheduled thread has the same
problem. The only reliable approach is a busy-wait loop on a maximum-priority thread:
// TorchController.kt - HandlerThread at THREAD_PRIORITY_URGENT_AUDIO
fun transmitBits(bits: BooleanArray) {
val halfPeriodNs = 2_777_778L // nanoseconds
var nextNs = SystemClock.elapsedRealtimeNanos()
for (bit in bits) {
cameraManager.setTorchMode(cameraId, bit)
nextNs += halfPeriodNs
while (SystemClock.elapsedRealtimeNanos() < nextNs) { / * spin */ }
}
}
Use Process.setThreadPriority(THREAD PRIORITY URGENT AUDIO) rather
than Thread.MAX PRIORITY: the former is the correct Android constant for time-critical
audio/sensor threads and achieves lower OS preemption rates in practice. Validate with a
slow-motion video (240 fps): count stripes per second and confirm180±5Hz.
4.4Speech Interface and Controls
Android’sSpeechRecognizer with EXTRA PREFER OFFLINE = true converts voice
to text on-device; the resulting String passes directly into the encoding pipeline. The de-
coded String at the receiver is spoken via TextToSpeech. Both sit behind a String-in
/ String-out interface; if STT is unavailable offline, a text field replaces it with zero codec
changes. V olume-up triggers push-to-talk; a gyroscope Z-axis peak exceeding 3 rad/s with
300 ms debounce provides an alternative for gloved underwater operation.
5 Reliability Strategy
Each failure mode from Section 2 is handled at the earliest possible stage in the pipeline:
• Burst errors.The depth-20 block interleaver disperses bursts of up to 20 consecutive
errors into isolated single-bit errors across 20 separate codewords. The Viterbi decoder’s
burst branch metric (4) further exploits the correlation structure of underwater errors that
the standard Hamming metric ignores. Together, these two components give the K= 4
code burst-resilience comparable to a much stronger uncoded system.
• Stripe uniformity failure.4B5B guarantees no run exceeds 3 bits, bounding stripe width
to 3 rows. An ambient flicker that would have corrupted a 20-row uniform stripe now
affects at most 3 rows - a correctable isolated error.
• Amplitude threshold drift.4-PPM removes the problem at source: symbol detection is
relative (which of four slots is brightest), not absolute. The adaptive threshold (2) handles
the residual ON/OFF boundary needed for per-row soft values and no longer needs to be
perfectly calibrated.
• RoI drift and illumination change.Fixed manual exposure prevents AE-induced lu-
minance steps. The sigma-threshold RoI detector re-runs on every frame with no stored
position model. The sliding-window threshold (2) recomputes local statistics each frame
without cross-frame state.
Proposal for Problem Statement 3, Hackenza 20268
None of these components attempt to suppress scattering. Consistent with Chi et al. [ 2],
scattering is a structural property of the channel to be modelled and exploited, not a noise source
to be removed.
6 MVP Definition and Demo Plan
Minimum Viable Product.The MVP is the smallest subset that produces a credible live
demonstration: a short text string transmitted from phone A and decoded on phone B, in a
scattering medium, with BER<10 −2. Text input drives the encoder; decoded text is displayed.
V oice is added on top once the codec round-trip is verified. The MVP scope is exactly the output
of Phases 1-3 of the implementation plan; Phase 4 wraps it with voice and evaluation.
Demo sequence.Each step is independently recordable; a failure at a later step does not
invalidate earlier ones.
1. In-air at 0.5 m, dark room.Transmit "HELLO WORLD" . Show raw camera frames with
RoI bounding box overlay and the decoded string appearing in real time. Establishes that
the codec, timing, and demodulation pipeline all function.
2. Scattering medium at 1 m.Add dilute milk solution (1 ml whole milk per 10 l water,
µs ≈0.3 m−1). Show that the RoIenlargesrelative to in-air, confirming the scattering
benefit predicted by Rayleigh theory. Record BER.
3. Ambient light robustness.With a lamp pointed at the receiver under the scattering medium,
show that the decoded string is still recovered. The adaptive threshold (2) tracks the
brightness change; the PPM decoder is unaffected by the absolute shift.
4. Voice round-trip.Speak a short phrase into phone A; hear it from phone B. Record for the
submission video.
7 Evaluation Plan
Metric Condition Baseline
BER Static, 1 m, scattering medium Uncoded OOK, fixed threshold
BER Hand-held motion, 1 m Uncoded OOK, fixed threshold
Decode success rate 50-2000 lux ambient light Fixed-threshold demodulation
Ablation: no interleaving Static, 1 m Full system
Ablation: OOK instead of PPM Static, 1 m Full system
Ablation: no RLL Static, 1 m Full system
Ablation: hard Viterbi vs soft Static, 1 m Hard Viterbi as lower bound
K= 7vsK= 4BER (Python) Simulated burst channelK= 4as lower bound
Table 3:Evaluation conditions.BER is computed over at least 1000 transmitted bits per trial, minimum three
trials per condition, reported as mean ± standard deviation. The ablation study measures each layer’s individual
contribution by removing it while keeping all others active. The milk solution proxy simulates moderate turbidity
without a large pool. The K= 7 comparison is a Python simulation result. Success targets: BER <10 −2 at 1 m
with ambient light; decode success rate>90%; BER coded <0.1×BER uncoded static.
8 Constraints
• Hardware.Only the rear flashlight, camera, IMU, and ambient light sensor may be used.
No external optics, lenses, waterproof housings with optical modifications, or secondary
microcontrollers.
Proposal for Problem Statement 3, Hackenza 20269
• Time.24 hours from project start to working demo. All components must be implemented,
integrated, and tested within this window.
• Environment.The primary test environment is a water tank or dilute milk solution proxy.
Performance is not guaranteed in highly turbid environments (harbours, estuaries) or at
distances beyond 2 m with the baseline codec.
• Device.Two Android smartphones with Camera2 API Level 3 ( MANUAL SENSOR capa-
bility confirmed) and a rear LED flash. The implementation targets minimum SDK 26. iOS
is excluded because A VFoundation does not expose equivalent per-row timing controls.
• Data rate.The system targets robustness, not throughput. At 30 fps/180 Hz, effective user
data rate is ≈36 bps. This is sufficient for 5-10 word messages; it is not a general-purpose
communication channel.
9 Limitations
• Hardware torch ceiling.Achievable toggle rate varies by device. If 180 Hz is unsus-
tainable, the fallback is 90 Hz (halving data rate). No codec changes are required; this is
detected and resolved in Phase 2 before integration begins.
•K= 4 free distance.The demo codec has df = 6. The gap relative to K= 7 (df = 10) is
most significant at distances beyond 2 m or in high-turbidity water. K= 7 performance is
quantified in the Python simulation; the upgrade path on mobile is a two-constant change.
• Interleaver buffering latency.A depth-20 interleaver must accumulate a full 20-codeword
matrix before the first bit can be transmitted. At 36 bps effective rate, this adds ≈0.6 s of
latency per message, which is acceptable for the target use case.
• Partial flashlight/camera occlusion.On most devices, the flashlight housing partially
occludes the camera’s near field, reducing effective RoI height and maximum achievable
data rate.
• Waterproof case refraction.A plastic case introduces a refractive interface and Fresnel
reflection not modelled in any profile. Per-case empirical tuning is required.
• High device velocity.Rapid longitudinal motion between phones changes effective path
length within a single frame, producing sub-row stripe position shifts. The EMA tracker
handles slow drift; fast motion is a known limitation.
• Turbid environment coverage.Profiles cover clear pool, moderate freshwater, and the
milk-solution proxy. Harbours, estuaries, or heavily disturbed water are outside the tested
range.
10 Future Scope
•K= 7 mobile deployment.The Python simulation demonstrates the BER improvement.
The mobile upgrade is a two-constant change; a profiling pass in Phase 3 determines
whether the target device can sustain 64-state Viterbi within the 33 ms frame budget.
• Monte Carlo-tuned generator polynomials.The Henyey-Greenstein photon tracer
produces the burst error length distribution p(L) for the target operating conditions. A
polynomial sweep over all K= 7 pairs selects the generators that minimise the weighted
path metric along the most probable burst paths in the actual channel, rather than the
AWGN-optimal NASA polynomials [6].
Proposal for Problem Statement 3, Hackenza 202610
• Adaptive modulation.Per-slot soft value variance during the preamble estimates current
channel quality. This estimate drives adaptive selection of PPM order (2-, 4-, 8-PPM) and
interleaver depth, maximising throughput in good conditions while maintaining robustness
in poor ones - the same approach used in Wi-Fi and LTE rate adaptation.
• Cross-frame Kalman tracking.The current EMA boundary tracker absorbs slow drift but
does not predict fast motion. A constant-velocity Kalman filter on RoI boundary position
would improve tracking under active swimming, reducing motion-induced frame discards.
• IMU-gated frame weighting.Accelerometer magnitude correlates with frame blur.
Rather than discarding high-motion frames entirely, a motion weight derived from IMU
could down-weight their contribution to the soft-value combiner, preserving throughput
while reducing blur-induced BER.
• Fresnel lens and periscope accessories.Excluded by problem constraints, but both
are natural hardware extensions. A Fresnel lens increases effective gain and extends
range; a periscope separates the flashlight and camera optical paths, eliminating the partial
occlusion limitation.
11 Deliverables
• A native Android (Kotlin / Camera2) application implementing: busy-wait torch driver
at 180 Hz, fixed-exposure camera pipeline, sigma-threshold RoI detector with EMA
tracking, sliding-window adaptive threshold with soft-value output, 4-PPM modulator and
demodulator, 4B5B encoder/decoder, depth-20 block interleaver/de-interleaver, K= 4
soft-decision Viterbi decoder with burst branch metric, sync-word frame detection with
CRC-16, and offline-capable voice interface.
• A Python script implementing the K= 7 convolutional code with burst-channel BER
curves comparing K= 7 against K= 4 , and the simulated burst error length distribution
used to setw burst.
• A demonstration video: in-air round-trip, scattering medium test with RoI overlay and
enlargement visible, ambient-light robustness, and a complete voice message round-trip.
• Quantitative evaluation table (Table 3) with ablation study and mean ± standard deviation
across≥3trials per condition.
• Success criterion:BER <10 −2 at 1 m in scattering medium with ambient light variation;
intelligible voice decode over a complete round-trip; BERcoded <0.1× BERuncoded static.
12 Implementation Plan
The key structural decision is that the entire codec is implemented and unit-tested as pure
Kotlin classes before any hardware is touched. A codec bug found through a physical device in
hour 16 is nearly impossible to distinguish from channel noise. The same bug caught by a JUnit
test in hour 3 takes five minutes to fix.
12.1Phase 1: Codec - Pure Kotlin, No Hardware (Hours 0-5)
Create the Android project (Kotlin, min SDK 26). Implement all codec components in
com/uflash/codec/and validate each with JUnit before wiring them together.
ConvEncoder.kt. K= 4 , G1 = [1,0,1,1] , G2 = [1,1,0,1] , 3-bit shift register.Test:encode
the all-zeros sequence; verify output against the known zero-state codeword.
Proposal for Problem Statement 3, Hackenza 202611
Phase Hours Exit Checkpoint
1. Codec (pure Kotlin, JUnit) 0-5 "HELLO"survives 5% injected BER
2. Hardware (torch + camera) 5-10 Stripe visible;10101010at>90%
3. Integration (text round-trip) 10-17 "HELLO"round-trip at 0.5 m in air
4. Scattering test, voice, evaluation 17-24 V oice phrase decoded at 1 m in medium
Table 4:24-hour implementation schedule.Phase 1 is entirely hardware-free. Fallback at each checkpoint is
pre-defined in the risk register.
BlockInterleaver.kt.Write bits row-by-row into a matrix, read column-by-column. Depth 20.
Test:interleave then de-interleave a known sequence; verify exact identity recovery.
RLLCodec.kt.Standard 4B5B lookup table, 16 entries.Test:encode all 16 nibbles; confirm
no output contains more than 3 consecutive identical bits; confirm decode inverts encode exactly.
PPMCodec.kt.Encode: 2 input bits → index ∈ {0,1,2,3} → 4-bit pattern with 1 in indexed
position. Decode: return index of maximum over 4 soft values.Test:all four 2-bit values produce
unique patterns; decode recovers each input.
ViterbiDecoder.kt.8-state trellis, branch metric M(b) =λ·w burst(b) from (4), traceback
length 15.Test:encode 200-bit random sequence; apply BlockInterleaver; inject burst
errors of length 2-4; de-interleave; decode; verify BER<0.02.
Encoder.kt / Decoder.kt.Chain all stages in order.Test:encode "HELLO WORLD" with 0
errors; verify exact string recovery. Inject 5% random bit errors; verify BER <1% after decode.
Phase 1 exit checkpoint.Do not proceed until this passes.
12.2Phase 2: Hardware - Torch Driver and Camera Pipeline (Hours 5-10)
TorchController.kt.HandlerThread at THREAD PRIORITY URGENT AUDIO with the
busy-wait loop from Section 4.3.Validate: slow-motion video at 240 fps; count stripes per
second; confirm 180±5 Hz. Fallback: if unsustainable, set half-period for 90 Hz. No codec
changes.
CameraEngine.kt.Camera2 session with fixed-exposure configuration from Section 4.2.
YUV 420 888 at 1280×720 , 30 fps. Verify by logging Y-plane row means to Logcat in a dark
room: alternating high/low values should appear at the flash position.Fallback: reduce to 480p
if frame rate is insufficient.
RoI detector + adaptive threshold.Implement Section 4.2 Stages 1-2. Transmit a looping
10101010 pattern.Checkpoint: >90% accuracy across 100 consecutive frames. If below,
sweep ω from 0.2 to 1.0 in steps of 0.1. If AE is partially active (checkSENSOR EXPOSURE TIME
inCaptureResult), add per-frame normalisation.
12.3Phase 3: Integration - Full Text Round-Trip (Hours 10-17)
Connect Encoder→TorchController on phone A andCameraEngine→Decoder
on phone B. Add preamble sync detection (88% match threshold) and CRC-16 validation.
Test with "HELLO" at 0.5 m in a darkened room.Checkpoint: correct round-trip decode.
Fallback sequence: (1) disable PPM, use OOK - isolates PPM slot boundary bugs from threshold
bugs; (2) if OOK also fails, issue is in RoI detection or fixed-exposure config; (3) if OOK passes
but PPM fails, recount rows per slot from a captured frame and fix boundary alignment. Submit
with the deepest working configuration; document outstanding components.
Optional (time permitting):extract R/G/B from YUV 420 888 via BT.601 conversion and
combine per-channel soft values with weights wR = 0.25 , wG = 0.50 , wB = 0.25 (Green is
least affected by chromatic dispersion and absorption across all pool profiles).
Proposal for Problem Statement 3, Hackenza 202612
12.4Phase 4: Scattering Test, Voice Interface, and Evaluation (Hours 17-24)
Scattering medium.Prepare dilute milk solution (1 ml per 10 l water). Test at 0.5 m and 1 m.
Log BER to CSV viaFileOutputStreamto external storage.
Voice interface.Wrap SpeechRecognizer (EXTRA PREFER OFFLINE = true )
andTextToSpeech.Fallback: text field. Zero codec changes.
UI.Single ConstraintLayout: TX/RX toggle, push-to-talk button (≥80 dp), σw-derived
signal quality bar at 4 Hz, scrolling message log.
Ablation study.Disable each encoding layer in turn at 1 m static; record BER over three
trials. This is the most valuable content in the write-up and is fully achievable in this phase.
Demo video.Record raw frames with RoI bounding box overlay, decoded text appearing in
real time, and the complete voice round-trip.
12.5Risk Register
• Torch rate insufficient.Set halfPeriodNs for 90 Hz. Data rate halves; no codec
changes. Detected in Phase 2 before integration.
• AE partially overriding manual mode.Monitor SENSOR EXPOSURE TIME across 100
frames. If it varies, divide each frame’s row means by its global mean before thresholding.
•Frame rate insufficient at 720p.Reduce to 480p before reducing flash rate.
• RoI not found.Recount rows per ON interval empirically from a captured frame; update
rows-per-symbol constant. Recheck that fixed exposure is active.
• Phase 3 round-trip fails.Disable PPM, then RLL, then interleaving in sequence. Submit
with the working subset; document outstanding components explicitly.
• Scattering medium BER exceeds in-air BER by >5× .Extend PPM slot duration by
one sub-interval. If BER remains high, reduce to 0.5 m; document as range-limited.
• Codec bug found in Phase 2 or later.This is what Phase 1 unit tests exist to prevent. A
bug surfacing through hardware is a Phase 1 checkpoint failure: return to Phase 1, fix the
failing unit test, re-validate, then resume.
•STT unavailable offline.Switch to text input. Full codec pipeline unaffected.
• Milk solution inconsistent.Milk fat globule size and concentration vary across products.
Prepare at 1 ml/10 l and verify BER at 0.5 m before moving to 1 m. Keep plain water
available for comparison. If BER at 0.5 m exceeds 10−1, the solution is too turbid; dilute
further.
13 Feasibility Notes
An honest assessment of implementation risk within a 24-hour window.
Lowest risk - implement these first, they will not surprise you:
• 4B5B encoder/decoder.A 16-entry lookup table. Encode and decode are each a single
array access. Zero design work, zero tuning, zero state.
• Block interleaver/de-interleaver.A 2D array transpose, ≈15 lines of Kotlin. The unit
test is trivial. This is also the single highest reliability improvement per line of code in the
entire system; do it early.
Proposal for Problem Statement 3, Hackenza 202613
• Fixed-exposure camera config.Four Camera2 API lines. The implementation risk is
near-zero; the hardware risk (partial HAL override) is well-defined and mitigated by
per-frame normalisation.
• Voice interface.Well-documented Android APIs behind a String-in / String-out
wrapper. Zero dependency on the codec.
Moderate risk - allocate explicit time, expect one iteration:
• Torch busy-wait timing.The code is simple but the choice ofTHREAD PRIORITY URGENT AUDIO
over Thread.MAX PRIORITY, and SystemClock. elapsedRealtimeNanos()
over System.nanoTime(), are both non-obvious. Using the wrong timer source pro-
duces systematic timing error that looks exactly like a channel problem. Validate early
with slow-motion video.
• Adaptive threshold (ω tuning).The formula is simple but the correct value of ω is device-
dependent and affects everything downstream. Budget 30-45 minutes for the Phase 2
sweep.
• PPM slot boundary alignment.Off by even one row in the rows-per-sub-interval count
breaks PPM entirely and produces BER near 0.75 (3 of 4 slots are wrong for each error).
The fallback to OOK in the Phase 3 checkpoint sequence exists specifically to isolate this
failure mode from threshold failures.
Highest risk - plan explicitly, know your fallback before you start:
• Sync word detection threshold tuning.Cross-correlation over a noisy bit sequence
is harder to tune than it looks. An 88% match threshold that is too tight discards valid
frames; too loose, it produces garbage decodes. Add this to the Phase 1 JUnit suite: inject
the preamble at noise levels of 0%, 5%, 10%, and 15% BER, verify the 88% threshold
produces correct accept/reject decisions at each level. Do not discover the right threshold
value at hardware integration time.
• End-to-end frame processing latency.All signal processing - Y-plane extraction, row-
mean computation over 720 rows, RoI detection, threshold demodulation, sync search,
PPM demodulation, 4B5B decode, de-interleaving, and Viterbi - must complete within
one frame period (33 ms at 30 fps). Profile on the actual target device in Phase 2. The most
likely bottleneck is the row-mean loop; replace Kotlin functional operators (.average(),
.sum()) with a manual loop over the rawByteArrayif timing is tight.
• The scattering medium test.The milk solution proxy is physically motivated but be-
haviourally unpredictable across milk products and preparation methods. Prepare it and
test at 0.5 m before moving to 1 m. If BER at 0.5 m exceeds10−1, dilute further. Critically,
compare stripe patterns in plain water and milk solution in Logcat before connecting the
full codec pipeline; confirm the RoI visibly enlarges, which validates the scattering theory
claim in the demo.
Proposal for Problem Statement 3, Hackenza 202614
References
[1] T. Chen, J. Chan, and S. Gollakota, “Underwater messaging using mobile devices,” inProc. ACM SIGCOMM,
2022, pp. 545-559.
[2] Y . Chi, C. Lin, J. Xiong, Y . Sun, L. Wang, and G. Wu, “U-Flash: Improving underwater optical communication
by scattering effect,”Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., vol. 8, no. 4, 2024.
[3] H. Buiteveld, J. H. M. Hakvoort, and M. Donze, “Optical properties of pure water,” inOcean Optics XII,
vol. 2258, 1994, pp. 174-183.
[4] L. Wang and S. L. Jacques, “Hybrid model of Monte Carlo simulation and diffusion theory for light reflectance
by turbid media,”J. Opt. Soc. Am. A, vol. 10, no. 8, pp. 1746-1752, 1993.
[5] Q. Liu and F. Weng, “Combined Henyey-Greenstein and Rayleigh phase function,”Appl. Opt., vol. 45, no. 28,
pp. 7475-7479, 2006.
[6] J. G. Proakis and M. Salehi,Digital Communications, 5th ed. McGraw-Hill, 2008.
[7] K. A. S. Immink, “Runlength-limited sequences,”Proc. IEEE, vol. 78, no. 11, pp. 1745-1759, 1990.
